docs: initial updates to state timeline documentation (#84224)
grafana/grafana: docs/sources/panels-visualizations/visualizations/state-timeline/index.md

# State timeline

> A state timeline panel displays data in a way that shows the state changes over time. When using a state timeline, the data is presented as a series of horizontal bars or bands called state regions. State regions can be rendered with or without values, and the state region’s length indicates a particular state's duration or frequency within a given time range.

Reviewer: this is the first time i've seen the term "state regions". it may be confusing because this panel also supports region annotations. this is not a request to change the terminology, just a comment. i dont have a better name for them 😅 

"horizontal bands" may alternatively be called "lanes"

Reviewer 2: The "state regions" terminology exists in these docs all the way back to when this visualization was introduced in v8.0. I'm thinking since it's been here all this time, it would be more confusing to change it.

Reviewer 2: The more I stare at the words "horizontal" and "length", the more I wonder if these are the correct words here. If we're talking about something we're measuring from left to right in a two-dimensional context, then that's really a "width" (like the way we'd refer to H and W of an image to control it's size). I've suggested removing the word "horizontal" entirely in my edit below because I don't think it's necessarily adding anything in terms of meaning.

If "length" makes sense to everyone else, I'm not intent on changing it; it just struck me as odd.

Reviewer: yeah, it can be either, really. "length in time", and "width in pixels"

> A state timeline panel displays data in a way that shows the state changes over time. When using a state timeline, the data is presented as a series of horizontal bars or bands called state regions. State regions can be rendered with or without values, and the state region’s length indicates a particular state's duration or frequency within a given time range.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A state timeline visualization displays data in a way that shows state changes over time. In a state timeline, the data is presented as a series of bars or bands called _state regions_. State regions can be rendered with or without values, and the region length indicates the duration or frequency of a state within a given time range.
```

> As an example, if you're monitoring the CPU usage of a server, a state timeline can be used to visualize the different states over time, such as “low,” “normal,” “high,” or “critical.” Each state can be represented in different colors and lengths. The lengths represent the duration of time that the server remained in that state.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, if you're monitoring the CPU usage of a server, you can use a state timeline to visualize the different states, such as “low,” “normal,” “high,” or “critical,”  over time. Each state is represented by a different color and the lengths represent the duration of time that the server remained in that state:
```

{{< figure src="/static/img/docs/state-timeline-panel/state-timeline-panel.png" max-width="1025px" caption="State timeline with string states" alt="A state timeline panel showing CPU usage in a Grafana dashboard" >}}

> The state timeline panel is useful when you need to monitor and analyze changes in states or statuses of various entities over time. A state timeline panel is useful when:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The state timeline visualization is useful when you need to monitor and analyze changes in states or statuses of various entities over time. You can use one when you to:
```

> - You have to monitor the status of a server, application, or service to know when your infrastructure is experiencing issues over time.
> - You want to identify operational trends over time.
> - You want to spot any recurring issues with the health of your applications.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Monitor the status of a server, application, or service to know when your infrastructure is experiencing issues over time.
- Identify operational trends over time.
- Spot any recurring issues with the health of your applications.
```

## Configure a state timeline

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

<!-- video TBA here -->

```

## Supported data formats

> The state timeline panel works best if you have data capturing various entities' states over time, which should include:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The state timeline panel works best if you have data capturing the various states of entities over time, formatted as a table. The data must include:
```

> - Timestamps - to indicate when each state change occurred.
> - Entity name/identifier - to represent the name of the entity you are trying to monitor.
> - State value - to represent the state value of the entity you are monitoring. These could be string, numerical, or boolean states.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Timestamps - To indicate when each state change occurred.
- Entity name/identifier - To represent the name of the entity you're trying to monitor.
- State value - To represent the state value of the entity you're monitoring. These could be string, numerical, or boolean states.
```

> ### Example
> 
> For example, the visualization works best if you have the following data in a table format.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Example

The following table is an example of the type of data you need for a state visualization and how it should be formatted:
```

| Timestamps         | Server A | Server B |
| ------------------ | -------- | -------- |
| 2024-02-29 8:00:00 | Up       | Up       |
| 2024-02-29 8:15:00 | Down     | Up       |
| 2024-02-29 8:30:00 | Warning  | Up       |
| 2024-02-29 8:45:00 | Up       | Up       |
| 2024-02-29 9:00:00 | Up       | Up       |

> If your query isn’t in the table format above, especially time-series data, then you can always apply [transformations](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/panels-visualizations/query-transform-data/transform-data/) to achieve the desired result.

Reviewer 2: Is there a specific transformation we should point people to or will it vary depending on people's datasets?

Reviewer 2: Okay cool. Then this can remain as is.

> If your query isn’t in the table format above, especially time-series data, then you can always apply [transformations](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/panels-visualizations/query-transform-data/transform-data/) to achieve the desired result.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If your query results aren't in a table format like the preceding example, especially for time-series data, you can apply [transformations](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/panels-visualizations/query-transform-data/transform-data/) to achieve this.
```

# State timeline

A state timeline visualization displays data in a way that shows state changes over time. In a state timeline, the data is presented as a series of bars or bands called _state regions_. State regions can be rendered with or without values, and the region length indicates the duration or frequency of a state within a given time range.

> For example, if you're monitoring the CPU usage of a server, you can use a state timeline to visualize the different states, such as “low,” “normal,” “high,” or “critical,” over time. Each state is represented by a different color and the lengths represent the duration of time that the server remained in that state:

Reviewer 2: Updating casing of states to match image
```suggestion
For example, if you're monitoring the CPU usage of a server, you can use a state timeline to visualize the different states, such as “LOW,” “NORMAL,” “HIGH,” or “CRITICAL,” over time. Each state is represented by a different color and the lengths represent the duration of time that the server remained in that state:
```

> {{< figure src="/static/img/docs/state-timeline-panel/state-timeline-panel.png" max-width="1025px" caption="State timeline with string states" alt="A state timeline panel showing CPU usage in a Grafana dashboard" >}}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{{< figure src="/static/img/docs/state-timeline-panel/state-timeline-panel.png" max-width="1025px" alt="A state timeline panel showing CPU usage" >}}
```

The state timeline visualization is useful when you need to monitor and analyze changes in states or statuses of various entities over time. You can use one when you need to:

- Monitor the status of a server, application, or service to know when your infrastructure is experiencing issues over time.
- Identify operational trends over time.
- Spot any recurring issues with the health of your applications.

## Configure a state timeline

<!-- video TBA here -->

## Supported data formats

The state timeline panel works best if you have data capturing the various states of entities over time, formatted as a table. The data must include:

> - Timestamps - To indicate when each state change occurred. This could also be the start time for the state change. An optional additional timestamp can also be added to indicate the end time for the state change.
> - Entity name/identifier - To represent the name of the entity you're trying to monitor.
> - State value - To represent the state value of the entity you're monitoring. These could be string, numerical, or boolean states.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Timestamps** - To indicate when each state change occurred. This could also be the start time for the state change. An optional additional timestamp can also be added to indicate the end time for the state change.
- **Entity name/identifier** - To represent the name of the entity you're trying to monitor.
- **State value** - To represent the state value of the entity you're monitoring. These could be string, numerical, or boolean states.
```

Each state ends when the next state begins or when there is a `null` value.

### Example

The following table is an example of the type of data you need for a state timeline visualization and how it should be formatted:

| Timestamps          | Server A | Server B |
| ------------------- | -------- | -------- |
| 2024-02-29 8:00:00  | Up       | Up       |
| 2024-02-29 8:15:00  | null     | Up       |
| 2024-02-29 8:30:00  | Down     | null     |
| 2024-02-29 8:45:00  |          | Up       |
| 2024-02-29 9:00:00  | Up       |          |
| 2024-02-29 9:15:00  | Up       | Down     |
| 2024-02-29 9:30:00  | Up       | Down     |
| 2024-02-29 10:00:00 | Down     | Down     |
| 2024-02-29 10:30:00 | Warning  | Down     |

> > **Note**: If your query results aren't in a table format like the preceding example, especially for time-series data, you can apply [transformations](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/panels-visualizations/query-transform-data/transform-data/) to achieve this.
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

The data is converted as follows, with the [null and empty values visualized as gaps](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/panels-visualizations/visualizations/state-timeline/#connect-null-values) in the state timeline:

> {{< figure src="/static/img/docs/state-timeline-panel/state-timeline-with-null-values.png" max-width="1025px" caption="State timeline with null values" alt="A state timeline panel showing the status of two servers in a Grafana dashboard" >}}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{{< figure src="/static/img/docs/state-timeline-panel/state-timeline-with-null-values.png" max-width="1025px" alt="A state timeline panel with null values showing the status of two servers" >}}

{{< admonition type="note" >}}
If your query results aren't in a table format like the preceding example, especially for time-series data, you can apply [transformations](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/panels-visualizations/query-transform-data/transform-data/) to achieve this.
{{< /admonition >}}
```

For example, if you're monitoring the CPU usage of a server, you can use a state timeline to visualize the different states, such as “LOW,” “NORMAL,” “HIGH,” or “CRITICAL,” over time. Each state is represented by a different color and the lengths represent the duration of time that the server remained in that state:

{{< figure src="/static/img/docs/state-timeline-panel/state-timeline-panel.png" max-width="1025px" alt="A state timeline panel showing CPU usage" >}}

The state timeline visualization is useful when you need to monitor and analyze changes in states or statuses of various entities over time. You can use one when you need to:

- Monitor the status of a server, application, or service to know when your infrastructure is experiencing issues over time.
- Identify operational trends over time.
- Spot any recurring issues with the health of your applications.

## Configure a state timeline

<!-- video TBA here -->

## Supported data formats

The state timeline panel works best if you have data capturing the various states of entities over time, formatted as a table. The data must include:

> - **Timestamps** - Indicates when each state change occurred. This could also be the start time for the state change. You can also add an optional timestamp to indicate the end time for the state change.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Timestamps** - Indicate when each state change occurred. This could also be the start time for the state change. You can also add an optional timestamp to indicate the end time for the state change.
```

Each state ends when the next state begins or when there is a `null` value.

### Example

The following table is an example of the type of data you need for a state timeline visualization and how it should be formatted:

| Timestamps          | Server A | Server B |
| ------------------- | -------- | -------- |
| 2024-02-29 8:00:00  | Up       | Up       |
| 2024-02-29 8:15:00  | null     | Up       |
| 2024-02-29 8:30:00  | Down     | null     |
| 2024-02-29 8:45:00  |          | Up       |
| 2024-02-29 9:00:00  | Up       |          |
| 2024-02-29 9:15:00  | Up       | Down     |
| 2024-02-29 9:30:00  | Up       | Down     |
| 2024-02-29 10:00:00 | Down     | Down     |
| 2024-02-29 10:30:00 | Warning  | Down     |

The data is converted as follows, with the [null and empty values visualized as gaps](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/panels-visualizations/visualizations/state-timeline/#connect-null-values) in the state timeline:

{{< figure src="/static/img/docs/state-timeline-panel/state-timeline-with-null-values.png" max-width="1025px" alt="A state timeline panel with null values showing the status of two servers" >}}

> {{< admonition type="note" >}}
> If your query results aren't in a table format like the preceding example, especially for time-series data, you can apply [transformations](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/panels-visualizations/query-transform-data/transform-data/) to achieve this.
> {{< /admonition >}}

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure this needs to be a note. I think it's fine for it to be part of the regular body text since it's integral to getting the right type of data for this visualization type. 

I moved this note down so that it doesn't interrupt the flow of seeing the table data visualized in the image. 

```suggestion
If your query results aren't in a table format like the preceding example, especially for time-series data, you can apply [transformations](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/panels-visualizations/query-transform-data/transform-data/) to achieve this.
```

{{< figure src="/static/img/docs/state-timeline-panel/state-timeline-with-null-values.png" max-width="1025px" alt="A state timeline panel with null values showing the status of two servers" >}}

#### Two time columns without null values

| Start time          | End time            | Server A | Server B |
| ------------------- | ------------------- | -------- | -------- |
| 2024-02-29 8:00:00  | 2024-02-29 8:15:00  | Up       | Up       |
| 2024-02-29 8:15:00  | 2024-02-29 8:30:00  | Up       | Up       |
| 2024-02-29 8:45:00  | 2024-02-29 9:00:00  | Down     | Up       |
| 2024-02-29 9:00:00  | 2024-02-29 9:15:00  | Down     | Up       |
| 2024-02-29 9:30:00  | 2024-02-29 10:00:00 | Down     | Down     |
| 2024-02-29 10:00:00 | 2024-02-29 10:30:00 | Warning  | Down     |

The data is converted as follows:

{{< figure src="/static/img/docs/state-timeline-panel/state-timeline-with-two-timestamps.png" max-width="1025px" alt="A state timeline panel with two time columns showing the status of two servers" >}}

> If your query results aren't in a table format like the preceding examples, especially for time-series data, you can apply specific [transformations](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/68887416/grafana-state-timeline-panel-with-values-states-supplied-by-label) to achieve this.

Author: @imatwawana, I've updated the link to this community post instead, as this is very specific to state timeline transformations. Leon has kindly pointed out that saying just "transformations" is not that useful since this can be applied to other panel types, too.

For example, if you're monitoring the CPU usage of a server, you can use a state timeline to visualize the different states, such as “LOW,” “NORMAL,” “HIGH,” or “CRITICAL,” over time. Each state is represented by a different color and the lengths represent the duration of time that the server remained in that state:

{{< figure src="/static/img/docs/state-timeline-panel/state-timeline-panel.png" max-width="1025px" alt="A state timeline panel showing CPU usage" >}}

The state timeline visualization is useful when you need to monitor and analyze changes in states or statuses of various entities over time. You can use one when you need to:

- Monitor the status of a server, application, or service to know when your infrastructure is experiencing issues over time.
- Identify operational trends over time.
- Spot any recurring issues with the health of your applications.

## Configure a state timeline

> Once you have created a [dashboard](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/dashboards/build-dashboards/create-dashboard/), the following video shows you how to configure a state timeline:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once you have [created a dashboard](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/<GRAFANA_VERSION>/dashboards/build-dashboards/create-dashboard/), the following video shows you how to configure a state timeline:
```

## Configure a state timeline

The following video shows you how to configure a state timeline:

<!-- video TBA here -->

1. Click the Grafana menu icon and, in the sidebar, click Dashboards.

1. On the Dashboards page, click New in top right corner and select New Dashboard in the drop-down or select an existing dashboard.

1. Click + Add visualization.

1. Under the visualization type dropdown, change the visualization type from Time series to State timeline.

1. In the Query tab below the graph, select your data source of choice. For example, if you have the [Grafana TestData data source](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/datasources/testdata/) configured, select CSV content from the scenario dropdown.

1. Copy the following CSV data as an example:

```
Timestamps,Server A,Server B
2024-02-29 8:00:00,Up,Up
2024-02-29 8:15:00,null,Up
2024-02-29 8:30:00,Down,null
```

1. Under Transform data tab, click + Add transformation and click [Convert field type](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/panels-visualizations/query-transform-data/transform-data/#convert-field-type).

1. Convert the Timestamps field to be of type time.

> 1. Add customization to your state timeline by updating the different [state timeline options](#state-timeline-options).

Reviewer 2: Let's chat about this addition. We don't want to be repeating what is a fairly simple process (creating a visualization) over and over in the docs. We have docs that explain how to add visualizations that we can point folks to. Is the focus here the transformation?

Reviewer 2: [Create a dashboard](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/dashboards/build-dashboards/create-dashboard/) describes how to create a dashboard including adding a visualization and a data source.

A state timeline visualization displays data in a way that shows state changes over time. In a state timeline, the data is presented as a series of bars or bands called _state regions_. State regions can be rendered with or without values, and the region length indicates the duration or frequency of a state within a given time range.

> For example, if you're monitoring the CPU usage of a server, you can use a state timeline to visualize the different states, such as “low,” “normal,” “high,” or “critical,” over time. Each state is represented by a different color and the lengths represent the duration of time that the server remained in that state:

Reviewer 2: Updating to match the image
```suggestion
For example, if you're monitoring the CPU usage of a server, you can use a state timeline to visualize the different states, such as “LOW,” “NORMAL,” “HIGH,” or “CRITICAL,” over time. Each state is represented by a different color and the lengths represent the duration of time that the server remained in that state:
```
